When I was 22, in the middle of an exchange year at the University of Cologne, in Germany, I had my first Brief Psychotic Episode. It took me almost two decades to get comfortable with this diagnose, by the way; when I visited doctors, and they routinely asked for health antecedents, I would say "crisi nerviosa" (nervous breakdown), and they'd ask me, what does that mean, "crisi nerviosa", what kind?

A hell of a painful kind, it was.

It was some time very late into the night, in the office at the university, where I worked as a student assistant. I had been writing a crazy e-mail to an ex-boyfriend, after going 72 hours straight without sleep, and after a month of weight loss. At some point I called another ex-boyfriend (a more recent one) to ask him to please come fast, or else something very bad would happen. The last thing I remember is me laying down on a brown couch, quite cold (leather? plastic?), in the waiting room of the university's hospital, with my head on his lap and my eyes closed. After that, my memory is blank until about a month later. 

My dad came to pick me up, after much convincing of the German doctors, who didn't want to release me. I got interned in a hospital in Barcelona. I was completely crazy: Still in the office, I had called my brother on the phone to ask him to go to my mom's, to prevent her from committing suicide; I got to the logical conclusion that I had AIDS; I was afraid of a fellow patient at the hospital; and so on. 

Slowly, and after adding shock therapy to the medication, I got better, and was allowed to go to the hospital's gardens, then to the streets near the hospital to have an orxata (which I hated as a kid; I like it since then). All I wanted then was to get out of the hospital. Please let me out, I'm doing better, please let me out. When I was finally allowed to go home, it was the biggest disappointment of my life. I discovered I was carrying hell with me out of the hospital. 

I remember all the shame about my breakdown. And the worry: just a bit of stress and I have this major breakdown? I'm never going to be able to work, to have children, to bear any responsibility. But the shame. The first time I went back to the university, with my dad, sometime in the fall (the breakdown was in May), I made him hide with me behind a column so I wouldn't have to greet three professors I knew, who were approaching. I also remember being aware that it was ridiculous to do so. 

As I learnt more about mental health, I began accepting that I was sick. After a while I even boasted that I was past shame. Until, several years later, I realized that I had not mentioned my illness to my kids, and I hid from them to take the medication. So then I started talking about it also at home. I now am very outspoken; whenever I am not feeling well, I tell people (if an email comes asking me to review, or to do a presentation, I say "sorry, I have mental health issues and I need to limit my commitments during this period"). 

However, I didn't dare write this post until now, when I just signed the contract for a permanent position. Just in case. 
